docs: add FT232R/FT245R, FT232H, FT-X. (#6)
wanda-phi/prjspeedbump: docs/src/ft232r.md

# FT232R and FT245R

The fourth generation of fixed-function D2xx devices, an upgrade to [FT232B and FT245B](ft232b.md).  The devices are:

- FT232RL: UART mode, 28-pin TSSOP
- FT232RQ: UART mode, 32-pin QFN
- FT245RL: [FIFO mode](fifo.md), 28-pin TSSOP
- FT245RQ: [FIFO mode](fifo.md), 32-pin QFN
- FT232RNL: revised version, UART mode, 28-pin TSSOP
- FT232RNQ: revised version, UART mode, 32-pin QFN
- FT245RNL: revised version, [FIFO mode](fifo.md), 28-pin TSSOP
- FT245RNQ: revised version, [FIFO mode](fifo.md), 32-pin QFN

FT232R and FT245R are the exact same device, and differ only in a configuration bit in the internal EEPROM.  Most likely, that bit can even be reprogrammed by the user.  Likewise, FT232RN and FT245RN are the exact same device.

TODO: verify this.

The FT2xxRN is a minor revision of FT2xxR, making the internal oscillator work when powered by 3.3V VCC.

Features:

- is a full-speed USB 1.1 peripherial
- single channel D2xx device, set to either UART or [FIFO](fifo.md) base mode by EEPROM
- in UART mode, the device has 5 CBUS pins that can be programmed (via EEPROM) to a variety of functions

>   - added EEPROM-programmable signal inversion on all UART pins

Reviewer: this sub-bullet doesn't seem to be related to its mommy bullet [maternity test requested]

Author: oops.

- dynamically-selectable alternate modes include:
  - FT2xxB-like [async bitbang](bitbang.md)
  - FT2232-like [sync bitbang](bitbang.md)
  - a new [CBUS bitbang](bitbang.md) mode
- 256-byte IN FIFO, 128-byte OUT FIFO
- internal EEPROM, replacing the external EEPROM interface of FT2xxB
  - pre-programmed factory area in EEPROM, including a unique chip ID
- 48MHz internal base clock, generated from either internal 12MHz oscillator or external 12MHz crystal
  - external oscillator has to be selected through EEPROM configuration
  - internal oscillator doesn't work on 3.3V VCC on the original FT2xxR

>   - ... leading to a fun factory programming procedure if you wish to use the device on 3.3V VCC

Reviewer: I'd reiterate that this only applies to the pre-N devices:

```suggestion
  - ... leading to a fun factory programming procedure if you wish to use the device on 3.3V VCC, which likely further motivated the FT2xxRN revision
```

| CBUS4 | SLEEP# | PWREN# |

The TXDEN, TXLED#, RXLED#, PWREN# and SLEEP# functions perform the same role as corresponding FT232B pins.  TXRXLED# is a composite LED output, showing both TX and RX activity.  CLK\* functions provide a clock output of the selected frequency (6 to 48MHz).

## EEPROM format

The device has a 40×32-bit internal EEPROM.  However, it pretends to be a 80×16-bit word EEPROM on the USB interface.  Words `0x00..0x40` are user-programmable, while words `0x40..0x50` contain factory-programmed data and are (allegedly) immutable.  Note that the factory area is not covered by the checksum (or maybe has its own checksum).

The device introduces a simple "EEPROM write lock" mechanism: the EEPROM can only be programmed when the current latency timer is set to `0x77`.

The "erase EEPROM" request is not supported on FT2xxR (presumably because, if supported, it'd erase the entire EEPROM along with factory data).

The 32-bit dword internal organization of the EEPROM is completely transparent on reads: the device will read the whole dword and reply to the USB request with just the relevant half of it.  However, writes need to be handled specially:

> - when the device receives a "write EEPROM word" request for an even-address word, the data is stored in an internal register, but EEPROM is not modified

Reviewer: They probably don't bother to forward from this intermediate register to USB reads, right?

Author: nope (marcan's unbrick code relies on that, so I'm pretty sure of that)

- when the device receives a "write EEPROM word" request for an odd-address word, the data is combined together with the last data word previously stored in the register by an even-address write, and the whole 32-bit dword is written into EEPROM

> This effectively means that EEPROM writes always have to be issued in aligned word pairs to work properly.  In a famous incident, FTDI Windows drivers abused this subtle behavior (which FT2xxR clones generally didn't replicate) to selectively brick clone devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This effectively means that EEPROM writes always have to be issued in aligned word pairs to work properly.  In an infamous incident, FTDI Windows drivers abused this subtle behavior (which FT2xxR clones generally didn't replicate) to selectively brick clone devices.
```
